docs: Add "How to setup storage using Rook Ceph?" (#494)
kinvolk/lokomotive: docs/how-to-guides/rook-ceph-storage.md

# Kubernetes storage with Rook Ceph on Packet cloud

## Contents

> - [Introduction](#introduction)

Reviewer: This diverges from the format that we have for the how-to-guides:

https://github.com/kinvolk/lokomotive/blob/master/docs/how-to-guides/authentication-with-dex-gangway.md#contents
https://github.com/kinvolk/lokomotive/blob/master/docs/how-to-guides/cloudflare-dns.md#contents

I'd stay consistent with the content structure.

Author: I have made changes to the structure, PTAL :-)

- Type of node, provided using `node_type`, should be one that has multiple disks like `c2.medium.x86` or `s1.large.x86`. Find out more servers [here](https://www.packet.com/cloud/servers/).
- To steer `rook-ceph` workload on these storage nodes provide `labels`.
- Provide `taints` so that other workload can be **steered away** by default. This setting is not mandatory, but isolating storage workloads from others is recommended so that other workloads do not degrade the performance of the storage.

#### Deploy the worker pool

Execute the following command to deploy the `storage` worker pool:

```bash
lokoctl cluster apply -v --skip-components
```

## Deploy `rook`

#### Config

Create a file named `storage.lokocfg` with the following contents:

```tf
component "rook" {
  node_selector = {
    "storage.lokomotive.io" = "ceph"
  }

  toleration {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Equal"
    value    = "ceph"
    effect   = "NoSchedule"
  }

  agent_toleration_key    = "storage.lokomotive.io"
  agent_toleration_effect = "NoSchedule"

  discover_toleration_key    = "storage.lokomotive.io"
  discover_toleration_effect = "NoSchedule"
}
```

> - `node_selector` should match the `labels` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `node_selector` should match the `labels` attribute provided in the `worker_pool`.
```

and everywhere variable is used. Just to distinguish between hcl variable and also maintain consistency with the configuration reference documents where the table of all attributes is called as `Attribute reference`.

- `toleration` should match the `taints` variable mentioned in the `worker_pool`.
- `agent_toleration_key` and `discover_toleration_key` should match the `key` of the `taints` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.
- `agent_toleration_effect` and `discover_toleration_effect` should match the `effect` of the `taints` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.

> For information about all the available configuration options for the `rook` component, visit the component's [configuration reference](../configuration-reference/components/rook.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on available configuration options for the `rook` component, visit the component's [configuration reference](../configuration-reference/components/rook.md).
```

#### Deploy the component

Execute the following command to deploy the `rook` component:

```bash
lokoctl component apply rook
```

Verify the operator pod in the `rook` namespace is in the `Running` state (this may take a few minutes):

```console
$ kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-operator
NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
rook-ceph-operator-76d8687f95-6knf8   1/1     Running   0          2m
```

## Deploy `rook-ceph`

#### Config

Add following contents to the previously created file `storage.lokocfg`:

```tf
component "rook-ceph" {
  monitor_count = 3

  node_affinity {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Exists"
  }

  toleration {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Equal"
    value    = "ceph"
    effect   = "NoSchedule"
  }

  storage_class {
    enable = true
  }
}
```

- `monitor_count` should be an odd number greater than three and not higher than the `count` variable of workers in the `worker_pool`.
- `node_affinity` should match the `labels` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.
- `toleration` should match the `taints` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.

> For information about all the available configuration options for the `rook-ceph` component, visit the component's [configuration reference](../configuration-reference/components/rook-ceph.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on available configuration options for the `rook-ceph` component, visit the component's [configuration reference](../configuration-reference/components/rook-ceph.md).
```

#### Deploy the component

Execute the following command to deploy the `rook-ceph` component:

```bash
lokoctl component apply rook-ceph
```

Verify the [OSD](https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/glossary/#term-ceph-osd-daemon) pods in the `rook` namespace are in the `Running` state (this may take a few minutes):

```console
$ kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-osd
NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
rook-ceph-osd-0-6d4f69dbf9-26kzl   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-1-86c9597b84-lmh94   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-2-6d97697897-7bprl   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-3-5bfb9d86b-rk6v4    1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-4-5b76cb9675-cxkdw   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-5-8c86f5c6c-6qxtz    1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-6-5b9cc479b7-vjc9v   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-7-7b84d6cc48-b46z9   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-8-5868969f97-2bn9r   1/1     Running   0          15m
```

## Access the Ceph dashboard

> Ceph dashboard provides valuable visual information. It is an essential tool to monitor the Ceph cluster. Here are steps on how to access it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ceph dashboard provides valuable visual information. It is an essential tool to monitor the Ceph cluster. Here are the steps on how to access it.
```

Obtain the password for the `admin` Ceph user by running the following command:

```bash
kubectl -n rook get secret rook-ceph-dashboard-password -o jsonpath="{['data']['password']}" | base64 --decode && echo
```

Execute the following command to forward port `8443` locally to the Ceph manager pod:

```bash
kubectl -n rook port-forward svc/rook-ceph-mgr-dashboard 8443
```

Now open the following URL: [https://localhost:8443](https://localhost:8443) and enter the username `admin` and the password obtained from the first step.

## Enable and access toolbox

> Ceph is a complex software system, and not everything that happens in the Ceph cluster is visible at the `rook` layer of abstraction. So command-line interface to interact with Ceph cluster is useful to extract such hidden events and information. Ceph toolbox helps you access the ceph cluster using `ceph` CLI utility. Using the utility you can configure the Ceph cluster setting and debug the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ceph is a complex software system, and not everything that happens in the Ceph cluster is visible at the `rook` layer of abstraction. So the command-line interface to interact with Ceph cluster is useful to extract such hidden events and information. Ceph toolbox helps you access the ceph cluster using `ceph` CLI utility. Using the utility you can configure the Ceph cluster setting and debug the cluster.
```

> To deploy the toolbox, the `rook-ceph` component config should set the variable `enable_toolbox` to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy the toolbox, the `rook-ceph` component config should set the attribute `enable_toolbox` to `true`.
```

just to avoid confusion with hcl `variable` declaration.

```tf
component "rook-ceph" {
  enable_toolbox = true
  ...
}
```

Execute the following command to apply the changes:

```bash
lokoctl component apply rook-ceph
```

Verify the toolbox pod in the `rook` namespace is in the `Running` state (this may take a few minutes):

```console
$ kubectl -n rook get deploy rook-ceph-tools
NAME              READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
rook-ceph-tools   1/1     1            1           39s
```

Execute the following command to access the toolbox pod:

```bash
kubectl -n rook exec -it $(kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-tools -o name) -- bash
```

Once inside the pod you can run usual `ceph` commands:

```bash
ceph status
ceph osd status
ceph df
rados df
```

## Enable monitoring

> Monitor `rook` and `rook-ceph` components using the `prometheus-operator` component. To enable your `rook` component config should have the variable `enable_monitoring` set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monitor `rook` and `rook-ceph` components using the `prometheus-operator` component. To enable your `rook` component config should have the attribute `enable_monitoring` set to `true`.
```

> # Storage with Rook Ceph on Packet cloud

Reviewer 2: I'm missing a bit what kind of storage we talk about here? Is it the storage providing PVs to the cluster?

Author: Yes storage that provides PVs, but then what other storage we might refer in the context of Kubernetes?

Reviewer 2: From ceph perspective, it might also be Rados object storage (S3 alternative), hence the question. I'll think how we could rephrase existing title.

Reviewer 2: Hm, some suggestions:
- Kubernetes PVs with Rook Ceph on Packet cloud
- Kubernetes storage with Rook Ceph on Packet cloud
- Rook Ceph CSI on Packet cloud

Author: Cool adding second option. :-)

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Deploy storage worker pool](#deploy-storage-worker-pool)
  - [Config](#config)
  - [Deploy the worker pool](#deploy-the-worker-pool)
- [Deploy Rook](#deploy-rook)
  - [Config](#config-1)
  - [Deploy the component](#deploy-the-component)
- [Deploy Rook Ceph](#deploy-rook-ceph)
  - [Config](#config-2)
  - [Deploy the component](#deploy-the-component-1)
- [Access the Ceph dashboard](#access-ceph-dashboard)
- [Enable and access toolbox](#enable-and-access-toolbox)
- [Enable monitoring](#enable-monitoring)
- [Make default storage class](#make-default-storage-class)
- [Additional resources](#additional-resources)

## Introduction

> This guide provides the steps for deploying a storage stack using the `rook` and `rook-ceph` Lokomotive component and explains how to access Ceph dashboard, Ceph toolbox and how to enable monitoring.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to mention here, what would be the end result of this guide.

## Prerequisites

> * A Lokomotive cluster deployed on a supported provider and accessible via `kubectl`.

Reviewer 2: In the title we talk about Packet, but here is just a supported provider? Does the guide works on AWS too then?

Author: Good catch. Made it Packet specific.

## Deploy storage worker pool

#### Config

Deploy a cluster with at least one worker pool dedicated to `rook-ceph`. A dedicated worker pool configuration should look like the following:

```tf
cluster "packet" {
  ...

  worker_pool "storage" {
    count = 3
    node_type = "c2.medium.x86"

    labels = "storage.lokomotive.io=ceph"
    taints = "storage.lokomotive.io=ceph:NoSchedule"
  }
}
```

> - The number of machines provided using `count` should be an odd number greater than three.

Reviewer 2: The example has `count = 3`, which does not satisfy `greater than three`. Should we change one or another?

Author: yep it needs an addendum of `or equal to`.

- Type of node, provided using `node_type`, should be one that has multiple disks like `c2.medium.x86` or `s1.large.x86`. Find out more servers [here](https://www.packet.com/cloud/servers/).
- To steer `rook-ceph` workload on these storage nodes provide `labels`.

> - Provide `taints` so that other workload can be **steered away** by default. This setting is not mandatory, but isolating storage workloads from others is recommended.

Reviewer 2: I'd expect a short note here, why is it recommended to isolate the storage. E.g. to avoid other workloads disrupting or degrading performance of the storage.

#### Deploy the worker pool

Execute the following command to deploy the `storage` worker pool:

```bash
lokoctl cluster apply -v --skip-components
```

## Deploy `rook`

#### Config

Create a file named `storage.lokocfg` with the following contents:

```tf
component "rook" {
  node_selector = {
    "storage.lokomotive.io" = "ceph"
  }

  toleration {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Equal"
    value    = "ceph"
    effect   = "NoSchedule"
  }

  agent_toleration_key    = "storage.lokomotive.io"
  agent_toleration_effect = "NoSchedule"

  discover_toleration_key    = "storage.lokomotive.io"
  discover_toleration_effect = "NoSchedule"
}
```

> - `node_selector` should match the `labels` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.

Reviewer 2: Side note: it seems we should use the same format for labels and taints in node pools and in components to allow using variables for them.

Author: Yes, but for now we have to resort to ask user to not do the mistake.

Reviewer 2: Let's create an issue to track it

Reviewer 2: Reported here: https://github.com/kinvolk/lokomotive/issues/758.

rook-ceph-operator-76d8687f95-6knf8   1/1     Running   0          2m
```

## Deploy `rook-ceph`

#### Config

Add following contents to the previously created file `storage.lokocfg`:

```tf
component "rook-ceph" {
  monitor_count = 3

  node_affinity {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Exists"
  }

  toleration {
    key      = "storage.lokomotive.io"
    operator = "Equal"
    value    = "ceph"
    effect   = "NoSchedule"
  }

  storage_class {
    enable = true
  }
}
```

- `monitor_count` should be an odd number greater than three and not higher than the `count` variable of workers in the `worker_pool`.
- `node_affinity` should match the `labels` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.
- `toleration` should match the `taints` variable provided in the `worker_pool`.

For information about all the available configuration options for the `rook-ceph` component, visit the component's [configuration reference](../configuration-reference/components/rook-ceph.md).

#### Deploy the component

Execute the following command to deploy the `rook-ceph` component:

```bash
lokoctl component apply rook-ceph
```

> Verify the [OSD](https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/glossary/#term-ceph-osd-daemon) pods in the `rook` namespace are in the `Running` state (this may take a few minutes):

Reviewer 2: The actual verification should be done by inspecting ceph cluster object, as it contains a state field, updated by operator.

Author: I wasn't aware of such a field, I have used OSDs coming up as a check to verify that now everything is converged.

Reviewer 2: Ah, my bad. It seems Rook docs actually recommends using the toolbox to verify cluster state: https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.4/ceph-quickstart.html.  I'm not sure which we should recommend then.

Author: I think checking OSDs are up and running has been proved to be reliable thus far.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, thanks.

```console
$ kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-osd
NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
rook-ceph-osd-0-6d4f69dbf9-26kzl   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-1-86c9597b84-lmh94   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-2-6d97697897-7bprl   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-3-5bfb9d86b-rk6v4    1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-4-5b76cb9675-cxkdw   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-5-8c86f5c6c-6qxtz    1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-6-5b9cc479b7-vjc9v   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-7-7b84d6cc48-b46z9   1/1     Running   0          15m
rook-ceph-osd-8-5868969f97-2bn9r   1/1     Running   0          15m
```

## Access the Ceph dashboard

Ceph dashboard provides valuable visual information. It is an essential tool to monitor the Ceph cluster. Here are steps on how to access it.

Obtain the password for the `admin` Ceph user by running the following command:

```bash
kubectl -n rook get secret rook-ceph-dashboard-password -o jsonpath="{['data']['password']}" | base64 --decode && echo
```

> Execute the following command to forward port `8443` locally to the Ceph manager pod:

Reviewer 2: It seems we could have an option to expose the dashboard using ingress.

Author: This is not supported by the chart in upstream. But it can be added.

Reviewer 2: Let's create an issue about it

Reviewer 2: Created https://github.com/kinvolk/lokomotive/issues/759

## Enable and access toolbox

Ceph is a complex software system, and not everything that happens in the Ceph cluster is visible at the `rook` layer of abstraction. So command-line interface to interact with Ceph cluster is useful to extract such hidden events and information. Ceph toolbox helps you access the ceph cluster using `ceph` CLI utility. Using the utility you can configure the Ceph cluster setting and debug the cluster.

To deploy the toolbox, the `rook-ceph` component config should set the variable `enable_toolbox` to `true`.

```tf
component "rook-ceph" {
  enable_toolbox = true
  ...
}
```

Execute the following command to apply the changes:

```bash
lokoctl component apply rook-ceph
```

Verify the toolbox pod in the `rook` namespace is in the `Running` state (this may take a few minutes):

```console
$ kubectl -n rook get deploy rook-ceph-tools
NAME              READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
rook-ceph-tools   1/1     1            1           39s
```

Execute the following command to access the toolbox pod:

```bash

> kubectl -n rook exec -it $(kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-tools -o name) bash

Reviewer 2: This is a deprecated format. `--` should be added.
```suggestion
kubectl -n rook exec -it $(kubectl -n rook get pods -l app=rook-ceph-tools -o name) -- bash
```
